tom or send a self-addressed business
size stamped envelope
to c-span 100 000 national scholarship
competition
400 north capitol street northwest
suite 650. washington dc
2001 voting is definitely important
so you have a voice c-span the political
network of record
next philip agee the 12-year cia veteran
and author talks about his new book on
the cia
he spoke earlier this week in fullerton
california
oh good evening this is not on can
anyone hear me
these aren't on
where's the switch now this one okay
can everyone hear me now good
all right good evening everyone we'd
like to welcome you to cal state
fullerton uh the organization that is
putting this event on is as productions
uh we're responsible for basically all
of the entertainment
and lecture type series on the campus
entirely student-run and funded
so we hope you enjoy this um as always
we are a desperate need of volunteers to
help us
in any minimal way whatsoever i mean if
it's you know someone in the media that
you can contact
if you know organizations in the area or
outside the area that are interested in
these type of programs
we really would love to meet you my name
is alex t harina i'm the co-director for
the program
in the back there standing with the
camera around his neck is randy thomas
he's also the co-director
i'd like to thank two people in
particular delia maldonado
and tracy thomas two of our strongest
volunteers that we've had all semester
they've
helped us very very much in putting this
event on
i also like to thank several
organizations one of them is the titan
bookstore which is off here to your to
my left your right
who have been here since last year
coming to most of our events
and providing us with some really good
literature and most of the literature
here applies to everything
that philip will be talking about
tonight also some organizations are
outside here
we have the sierra club who has a very
strong showing here tonight we also have
justice vision which has a lot of our
events that we've had in the past on
videotape for a very economical price if
you'd like to purchase one of those
afterwards
and if i'm forgetting oh in part people
against racist terror
we have plenty of free magazines for you
to read also for those of you who don't
know
c-span is here tonight this event will
be nationally rebroadcast
in the coming weeks so keep your eyes
open for that we
also have um a local cable access
television station from long beach who
are here
there will be video taping it tonight
and of course justice vision is
videotaping tonight
and we'd like to thank kpfk radio for
coming down to record this event so
you'll be able to hear that again
well i'm getting tired of here um we'll
jump right into it for those of you who
don't know philip agee
he was the first cia covert operative
who went public
uh pretty much let the world know what
was going on in the cia not
there's no you know there's good and
there's bad sides to basically every
coin
he should normally we only get to hear
the quote good sides but he shed a lot
of light on a lot of the
dirty work that was going on within the
cia
if you want to call it that that's very
lightly with the death squads and
all sorts of other atrocities that were
happening throughout the western
hemisphere and throughout the world
he suffered a lot of personal damage for
that he was completely ostracized
from five countries under the pressure
of the united states government
and only last week was he allowed
formally back into england where he was
invited by the house of commons last
thursday and he gave a speech
in honor of his formal re-entry into
england
so we'd like to give a thanks for that
congratulations
i'd like to prep tonight by telling you
that he's going to give a lecture that
he's never given before
he's been working very diligently to
write this lecture so
you're in for a real treat i believe uh
for those of you who are not familiar
with the books that he's written i'm
just going to mention two
one of them the first one that he wrote
probably one of the most popular is
inside the company at ci adari which i
believe is no longer in print in the
united states which is why we don't have
it here for you tonight
the other one is his autobiography on
the run which describes in detail what
was going on
after he published that last book and we
have plenty of books over there
and he will be signing some of those
books if you'd like to have buy one of
those books and like to have them sign
it
and with that i'd like to introduce
philadelphia
uh thank you alex for that introduction
and i would like to add my thanks
also to associated uh student
productions for
the work in putting on this meeting
tonight
i got a problem
i'm going to talk a little about the
united states intelligence community
today and
in the years ahead
it was in fact a a really gratifying
experience to go back
to uh london last week because it was uh
18 years since uh i had been expelled
uh deported from britain along with my
family and that had been followed by
deportations from france and from
holland and germany and italy and
refusal of entry by norway
all nato countries under pressure from
the united states
and the last time i had been in the
house of commons
in 1977 was to watch from the gallery
the debate going on over my deportation
and we knew of course the way it was
going to come out and so
what good news it was and how gratifying
to be
invited back by labour party mps
labor having been in power when they
expelled me
but it wasn't really their fault it
happened that
henry kissinger because of a trip i had
made to jamaica
uh trying to assist the manly government
of the time the social democratic
government
uh resist the efforts by the cia to
overturn his government
um that kissinger took this step of
secretly intervening i didn't know until
years later
when i got the documentation under the
foia that kissinger had made two secret
trip two secret trips over to london
uh uh in the wake of my trip to jamaica
to take up my case
and my trip to jamaica with the british
government and just a few weeks after
that the police in cambridge came around
to my door at eight o'clock one morning
with a deportation notice
well we defended
legally and we defended politically i
went all over the uk giving speeches and
there was a tremendous
uh response in my uh and my support
but in the end um uh i had to go
and uh as i say it was extremely
gratifying to be invited back to the
house of commons for a speech
after all these years
the question uh arises with respect to
the current tasks of the united states
intelligence community including the
central intelligence agency or cia
today and in these years ahead
one hears most often
the common wisdom that the cia
and the rest of the intelligence
community is going to have to be focused
on
international terrorism the
international
international narcotics trade such
dangers as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction those are the
chemical biological and nuclear weapons
also on regional and ethnic conflicts
around the world
such as we're seeing all the time and
have been for
several years in the former yugoslavia
other targets which are coming up all
the time in terms of the intelligence
community
are the rogue states the so-called rogue
states um
iraq libya iran north korea and for some
syria and then as all of you probably
know they're talking a lot about the
intelligence community particularly the
cia getting into the collection
of economic financial and commercial
type of intelligence well
i'm going to come back to these
requirements in a moment but i would
like to set the
context uh with a quick sketch
of how i see how i
uh for one see uh the
international political scene into which
this
future and uh and in fact the current
intelligence operation has got to
fall and this to me is extremely
alarming
i refer to the
extraordinary growth of the extreme
right
both in europe and in the united states
over the past
uh 10 years or so or say 10 or 15
years right now in europe you have a
scene which is roughly divided between
those
parties and organizations that engage in
electoral politics
and on the other hand those which reject
electoral politics and engage in
terrorism
and all types of violence
on december 17th to raise one example
the austrians will go to the polls again
the traditional coalition between the
conservatives and the social democrats
in austria broke down a few weeks ago
and now they
have to go back to the polls uh the
austria freedom party
led by the neo-nazi yuppie you're
hyder gained 23 percent of the vote in
the past elections which were only uh
last year the polls show his party now
gaining about 25 percent or even pulling
up even with the two
traditional parties and this is i must
say a very alarming
factor in italy the neo-fascists have
already come to power
uh last year in the march elections and
that government lasted for nine months
until it fell it was a coalition of the
neo-nazi a neo-fascist party the msi or
italian social movement which
took on a new name the national alliance
in january of last year in preparation
for the march elections
they were in coalition with the
berlusconi party
force italia and the racist northern
league
which is a regional party but they did
win the elections with something like 43
percent of the vote and later on in the
european parliamentary
elections of last year in june they are
gathered
49 percent of the vote this coalition
uh they did fall apart but the
neo-fascists are remaining very very
strong in italy and
it is possible that this coalition will
come together again and that they will
form the new government
when elections occur in the spring
not a very pretty prospect either
in france recently municipal elections
show the two neo-nazi parties there the
uh the national front winning
the national fund itself winning 15
percent of the vote and the
other far-right party led by a man whose
name is de villier
gaining five percent so the extreme
right in france is gaining at the polls
something like 20 percent now
in norway the new right party
is now the third most voted party
so you see a very dangerous surge
of these extreme right new right
so-called new right parties which reject
completely the teaching of the
enlightenment
of the french revolution in such
concepts as
liberty equality fraternity the
declaration of the rights of man
and citizen all of this tradition which
has led to the
liberal democracy with all its faults
that we have today
and their agenda is something quite
different they reject
universal uh human and civic
uh civil rights and they seek to impose
very strong
arbitrary totalitarian government
of a neo-fascist stripe they have simply
these new new writers
uh starting in the early 1970s writers
in france and germany
repackaging the fascism of the past
to make it more acceptable today
then with respect to the violent groups
they are active
everywhere in britain alone they had
last year about
8 000 incidents based on racism
and hate you've read no doubt about the
fire bombings of the turkish homes
and cultural clubs in germany by
skinheads allied to these
neo-nazi organizations they calculate
there are something like in germany
alone
82 different neo-nazi organizations
and they are being banned from time to
time and then the same groups
pop up again with a different name
they are working in uh in harmony with
something like 5000 skinheads in germany
and they are standing behind and
carrying out the dirty work
for sorry
for the two neo-nazi electoral parties
one called the republican and the other
called the german people's union
both of which parties are believed to
have about 25 000 members
the violent scene is thought to uh
include about
43 000 to 45 000 members and so you're
getting up to
very close to 100 000 full-time
activists
in the neo-nazi scene in germany
and they are getting away literally with
murder
the scene is also very interesting in
belgium where the flems
block is now in control of the antwerp
government in britain
it is not a question of electoral
politics they are uh have no strength at
all
but they are involved in attacks all the
time
i just mentioned like 8 000 uh attacks
against and the targets you know are the
normal targets they are the
people of color they are immigrants they
are the
disabled and so forth we know who those
targets are
in the united states are the same in the
in
europe and of course jews and jewish
monuments
just last year the lubeck synagogue
lubeck being a city
north of hamburg where i live was
firebombed the first
firebombing of a jewish synagogue since
the hitler period
in germany well this scene over there in
europe is really very
disturbing no less disturbing is the
scene in the united states
where the extreme right has grown so
fast but in the united states
as opposed in europe as you all know we
have this religious content
to a very large sector the so-called
religious
right uh and in the forefront of the
religion
of the religious right we have the
christian coalition which numbers
practically two million people
right now and they are able to draw new
members constantly from the
34 million or so americans who consider
themselves
to be born again evangelists
this religious right
is seeking to take control of the
republican party as you may know some of
you
the christian coalition has said out and
out that they hope to control the
republican party
fully by the year 2000. they already
have taken control of the state
apparatus of the republican party in
between 20 and 30
states according to what i've read what
do they want to do
they want to impose a fundamentalist
interpretation of
biblical law on all the rest of us
by legislating into the civil law of the
united states
what they deem to be the proper morality
as they see it
taken from the old testament this is
also a position of a growing movement
called
dominion theology or
best known through the writings of a man
whose name is rush dooney
and these are people who seriously
intend to impose their morality
on all the rest of us
from the christian right we have the
remnants uh
of course of the tax revolt movement of
the 70s and 80s
as uh expressed through the
hasikomitatis movement
found in the county superiority movement
or the county supremacy movement
and you are probably aware i would
expect
that these people say that there is no
higher
in the county in the united states and
that the constitution did not give
the federal government the right to
collect income taxes
these people were violent in the
1980s and they continue to exist today
and there are all these other groups on
the extreme right in the united states
the christian patriot movement for
example which in turn spawned
the private militia movement
following the ruby ridge shootout and
the events of waco
the fbi apparently uh estimates that in
the private militias in the united
states
there are between ten thousand and one
hundred thousand
members which means that they really
don't know
they have no precise idea but there's no
doubt that these
groups are growing all the time because
of the
economic situation in both europe and in
the united states in europe
within the european union most of the
countries of western europe
about 385 million people unemployment is
at 12 which translates into 20 million
people
unemployed these people are resentful
they are looking for reasons for their
condition
and they are of course scapegoating
as they always have the same thing
or something similar is happening in the
united states with
the export of millions of jobs
especially the white men with less
education
and less skills are wondering what it's
all about
they are bewildered they are alienated
and they are angry
as you know very well and these are the
millions of people
from on whom from this great pool
that the militia movement can draw on
i might just mention that with respect
to the oklahoma city bombing
i think it's very possible that that was
carried out by a very small group
following the doctrine of leadership
leaderless
resistance as developed by one of the
leading figures in this movement
a man whose name is louis beam he's a
former leader of the texas
ku klux klan a former helicopter gunner
in vietnam who is now closely associated
with aryan nations at hayden lake
in idaho not so far in fact from ruby
ridge where the weaver shootout
took place this is also a very
disturbing and alarming scene and this
to me
is the real danger in the years ahead
because these militias here in the
united states are the potential
brown shirts of the coming years
and all they lack really is a
leader a charismatic leader i might also
mention
another growing movement which is very
closely allied with militias
but it's a religious movement the
christian identity
movement this is a theological
development from british israelism which
came over to this country in the last
century and then was developed
into a an unrecognizable form these
people
and i can't go into this at great length
although i could but they believe
in free adamite people that god created
inferior beings before adam and eve and
that the non-aryans in the world today
are descendants from these pre-adamite
people meaning people of color of course
and anyone
with darker skin than aryans they look
upon those people
non-aryans as mud people that's what
they call them
and they refer to the government in
washington as zog
standing for zionist occupation
government
they consider the government to be the
enemy just as the militias do
and this is a church movement they
actually have churches and they have
been very strong here in southern
california
through the years since the 1930s
so this is the scene in the united
states and
as i look at the picture
the government and those who are dealing
with what the targets of the
intelligence community should be
are being as always
still blind in the right eye
they speak of the libyans and the north
koreans and so forth
which are in fact legitimate targets but
you will not see
the far right uh in europe or the united
states
really on the agenda it could be now
after oklahoma city that the fbi is
taking
a closer look at the extreme right and
at the militia
movement the violent
part of the extreme right but so far i
haven't uh
i haven't seen that it in fact is
happening
well consider the cia
today they have had some very
unfortunate developments
as we all know in recent years
the worst of course was the aldrich ames
case
in which he was able to work for the kgb
and then for the russian foreign
intelligence service for
nearly ten years during which they paid
him more than two million dollars
of which he spent a large portion
in the most ostentatious way no
explanation at all
how they did not get onto him earlier
it was plain apparently plain
incompetence
but not only did he uh tell the soviets
all that the cia was doing against them
and he was involved in
anti-soviet operations so he was in the
perfect place to be able to tell them
what was being carried out against them
and in fact according to press reports
he caused the arrest and execution of
a dozen or more people in the former
ussr
ames not only did those things but he
also working with the soviets was able
to place
a sources double agents which were
really under
the control of the soviets people were
feeding false information into the cia
and it was going to the top level of the
united states government this was just
in the newspapers last week
it was going to the top levels of the
united states government including
the president and they were getting this
false information and the cia apparently
it's
it's in dispute right now but there is
some reporting that the cia
was actually passing this information up
the line to the president and others at
the top level
knowing that it was doubtful
well that is another thing that ames did
but that was not the only problem
these are what they're known as counter
intelligence
failures i might mention here very
quickly uh uh
kind of at the beginning of uh the
difference in practice and theory
between uh various types of operations
there are three fundamental types of
operations in intelligence
one is known in the cia as
foreign intelligence or fi for short
that is the collection of information
from around the world
from open and secret sources and then
the analysis of the information and the
reporting of that information to the
consumer
that is to the people who have to have
this intelligence to use it that is the
intelligence cycle or the collection
process
known as foreign intelligence or fi
the second of the three categories is
known as
counter intelligence or ci for short
these are all the efforts that an
intelligence service undertakes to
prevent the penetration of the service
by hostile services it also includes the
efforts
by a given service to penetrate other
services
it's a a kind of two-way street and
the worst failures of the cia in recent
years of course have been in this
counter-intelligence field
the third category is covered action
or ca for sure this is known uh in the
soviet uh
or the russian tradition as active
measures but we called it
covert action and these are the ways in
which the
cia which has the charter for covert
action
in the united states government has
attempted to manipulate the events in
other countries through the penetration
of the institutions of power beginning
with governments and political parties
and military and security services and
trade unions women's organizations youth
and student
organizations churches
and in a very important way the public
information media
these are standard uh categories
and as i say these worst failures for
the cia in recent years have been in the
counter-intelligence field
iran for example since 1988
is reported to have rolled up at least
30 different
cia operations then in 1985 there was a
defection of
edward lee howard a cia officer who was
trained to go to moscow
and work in the cia station in moscow
inside the u.s embassy
he was found to be involved with drugs
he was fired from the cia and he then
defected
to moscow he got away from the fbi who
had him under surveillance because he
had told the soviets
everything he knew about the cia people
that is the
russians who were working for the cia in
the soviet union
and these operations began to go bad for
the cia and so they
realized that howard may have told the
soviets and so they told the fbi the fbi
put surveillance on him
and one day
his wife drove the car out of the garage
it was in arizona i think
and uh she had a mannequin or dummy
sitting in the front seat to represent
her husband
and uh the fbi followed the car and he
went in another direction got away went
to moscow he's there now
he was able to tell them quite a lot uh
then in
1987 there was a defector from the cuban
intelligence service his name was
aspiaga
and he was able to tell the cia
that every one of their operations in
cuba
that the cia thought was a genuine
operation was in fact a double
agent really working for the cuban
intelligence and security services uh
as a matter of fact the cubans uh
knowing that aspiago had told
all of this uh ran a a
an 11-part television series in the
summer of 1987
in which they showed camera taken
of the cia people working out of the u.s
intersection in havana
going to put objects underneath stones
and in holes and so forth you see a man
and his wife driving out to an isolated
section
where they would get out of the car with
a picnic basket walk over to this uh
wooded area and then hide something
they the cubans in other words had
mounted cameras
hidden cameras to to take video
of the cia people well there were 27
different cases which were revealed on
television
all 26 all all but one uh were cubans
some of them had worked for as long as
20 years
for the cia and the cia never caught on
all of them had
passed numerous polygraphs or lie
detectors
and i think the average period in which
they'd worked for the cia was something
like 15 years
well one of the problems uh with the
cia's
predicament in these years uh these
recent
recent years has been the tremendous
pressures put on the case officers in
the field
in the field for recruitments and they
are
promoted and their fitness report is
written on
the numbers of recruitments that they
undertake
in undertaking not so much on the
quality of the information coming in
but the numbers game again as in vietnam
that means that it has gotten so bad
that there have been
paper recruitments by cia officers and
false reports or fabricated reports
coming in from non-existent agents
according to inside sources
it means also that the quality of the
personnel has
diminished is it declined to the point
where an aldrich aims for example
by all accounts a totally mediocre
person
unable to recruit even his next-door
neighbor
was able to be in a very sensitive
position
so that when he recruited himself for
the kgb
very very sensitive information which
cost a lot of lives it also means that
the morale has gone down drastically
within the cia and some reports say that
they are actually
self-destructing within the directorate
of operations
well i happen to be one of those people
who believes that there is a need for an
intelligence service
because there are dangers
and there are legitimate targets and
these ones i mentioned earlier
like international terrorism the
narcotics trade
the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction
these are all legitimate targets because
those are real threats
to ordinary people in the united states
but when you take economic financial and
commercial
intelligence collection i want to assure
you that there's nothing new to this
it has been going on all along
it is only spoken of today i think as
something
perhaps new because they are looking for
ways
to justify dollar budget that they have
in the united states intelligence
community
that is more than 10 percent of the
overall
defense budget of that 28 billion
dollars the cia receives something like
3 billion
all the rest go to the other agencies
because you know we have about a dozen
or so and the bulk of this money goes to
the satellite programs and to the
national security agency which
is monitoring communications and
electronic transmissions
all over the world
just this year there have been two major
scandals in western europe
where the cia was spying on allies
and this commercial and financial and
economic intelligence collection does
mean that the
cia and other intelligence agency will
agencies will have to be collecting from
um
and penetrating allies in order to get
the information i'm talking about nato
countries and
japan the first case that occurred this
year was in france
february when the french government
requested
the departure from france of five cia
people
four of them led by the chief of station
were working under diplomatic cover in
the embassy and one a woman was working
under non-official cover outside the
embassy they tried to
recruit a french government official to
give them information on
the french positions with respect to
negotiations going on within the world
trade organization or
gats known as gat before
the second case was just last month when
it was revealed that
in auto negotiations between the united
states and japan
last summer the cia was spying on the
japanese
negotiators and tapping their telephones
to hear the conversations between the
negotiators and the
government officials with whom they were
working and also with the auto companies
cases
excuse me both of these cases
damaged severely the relations between
the united states
and the other countries in the case of
france
according to press reports the cia was
forced to close down its entire
operation
in france and bring all the people out
well i say this is nothing new and i
have
uh with me tonight uh a document which
was sent to me
this is uh as published in a book that i
edited with louis wolff in 1978 called
the cia in western europe in 1976
i received anonymously through the mail
a state department document which was
classified
and it was the economic financial
and commercial
intelligence requirements as laid out by
the cia
and this airgram which was signed by
kissinger then secretary of state
was sent to all united states diplomatic
posts around the world
it was what the state department was
supposed to do to
fulfill these requirements the cia
naturally was fulfilling the same
requirements
by trying to get this type of
information through spies
and other secret methods
two of the kiq's asked specifically by
the way there were
69 k iqs or key intelligence questions
for 1975. that was the document i
received from 1975.
this uh document in fact
included not all uh
69 but numbers 56 through 63
that is eight topics for collection in
this area because the
vast majority something like half of all
of these key intelligence questions uh
were requirements on the soviet union
but these
that i received were simply the
commercial
economic and financial requirements and
they were of course mostly
uh directed for uh toward the western
world
and western europe particularly and
japan the most advanced industrial
countries
two of them asked specifically for
information on the economic performance
of the major
non-communist industrial nations naming
the united kingdom and others by name
and on the positions these countries
were likely to take incoming
international trade and financial
negotiations concerning financial
negotiations
with the international monetary fund the
kiks which were in that document
ask for information on the objectives of
priority countries
that is west germany japan france and
the united
kingdom and timely reporting
and timely reporting on this is a quote
prepared negotiation strategies
including initial proposals and fallback
positions information on foreign
competition for
american companies exports is what it
would be expected of special
interest two other kiq's request
information on the foreign assets like
bank accounts
and investment accounts of the major oil
exporting
companies particularly the arabs on the
vulnerabilities of these countries
to competitive energy resources and on
the prospects for
converting their oil exports into
imports
of united states military equipment
anyone who's interested in seeing this
uh i'm happy to show it to you after
our meeting
that document by the way the
authenticity of the document
back in 1976 was confirmed by the united
states embassy
in london well not to be forgotten is
cuba
the intelligence community community
particularly the cia
is without a single doubt ordered
constantly to collect information that
will
help to enforce the 35 year old blockade
against cuba roberto robina
said he is the foreign minister of cuba
said in a meeting where i was present
that of every 10 possible commercial
deals
or deals for investment in cuba
by foreign companies the united states
is able to
kill nine and they do this through the
collection of intelligence and bringing
pressure on
governments and companies and
individuals to
desist from dealing with cuba
and as a result of this activity
in cuba and many others are suffering
badly
well the future of united states
intelligence
and particularly of the cia has to be
seen i think within the context of the
overall
united states international security
policies
two years ago no it's three years now
uh some documents leaked to the new york
times
projected united states defense needs uh
over the next 10 years and they're
extremely interesting to read
because the overall defense budget was
going to be
uh calculated and then justified
according to the analyses that these
documents
uh contained and they were not just
pentagon documents but they were the
product of of analysis and study
and conversations
between the pentagon the cia the
national security council and president
bush
at that time and they were used to
justify this five-year
projected defense budget of 1.5 trillion
dollars
the scenarios that they had drawn up was
another war with iraq
a war with north korea simultaneous
wars with north korea and iraq
a war to defend a baltic state from a
resurgent and
expansionist russia a war to defend the
lives of united states
citizens living in the philippines in
case the new people's army had
prospered a war to defend the war to
defend the panama
uh panamanian government and the canal
against quote-unquote narco-terrorists
and their seventh scenario was the
emergence of an
anti-us global adversarial rival
those were their words or and another
quote
aggressive expansionist international
coalition
this document went on to say and this is
a quote
our strategy must now refocus on
precluding the emergence of any future
future global competitor our first
objective is to prevent the emergence of
a new rival
either on the territory of the fort of
the former soviet union
or anywhere else
another quote from the document is
interesting
the united states must account
sufficiently for the interests of the
advanced
industrial nations to discourage them
from
challenging our leadership or seeking to
overturn the established political
and economic order they're talking about
allies there
we must maintain the mechanisms for
deterring potential competitors
from even aspiring to a larger regional
or global role this is
what i interpreted as a
global bully unipolar plan
for the new world order
well if the united states is going to
assert hegemony around the world then
they are certainly going to
have to have an intelligence service and
an intelligence input to do it and there
is much overlapping between what i
mentioned earlier foreign intelligence
counter-intelligence and
covert action they overlap constantly
there is also an economic background
to to these policies because
the united states for at least 100 years
has realized that
we cannot consume within the country all
that we produce
and in order to avoid depression such as
the one that occurred in the 1890s
the united states has got to have access
to foreign markets
for exporting surplus production from
this country we also have to have
access to foreign labor
and to foreign resources
to give you an idea of what this means
for the united states economy
i want to uh just mention a few figures
this comes from an article i wrote a
couple of years ago
the economics of cold war domination
meant large transfers of wealth from
south to north
and this is still going on today through
the so-called neo-liberal
economic project also known as the free
market system from 1982
when the debt crisis reached critical
mass
to 1990 the net flow of wealth from
south to north
was 418 billion dollars
and this is transfer from the poor
countries to the
rich this net transfer resulted from
average monthly payments of interest and
principle
of nearly 12.5 billion dollars by the
south
or a nine-year total of 1.3 trillion
dollars
such payments as susan george ports out
in her
book the debt boomerang were only
possible through
accumulation of new debt by the four
countries
which by the end of 1990 owed 60 61
more than they had owed in 1982.
mass misery and environmental
destruction in the south are part and
parcel
of the continuing net transfer
this is uh continuing today and the
united states is attempting to impose
all over the world but especially in the
south latin america
and other third world countries this uh
neo-liberal system and it is a
continuation
of what i just read that is that they
are contributing to our prosperity that
is to the
those who have prosperity in this
country even now in mexico with nafta
not even two years old
there are grave developments for
the peasantry for example and for
workers
in mexico as a result of nafta just as
there are grave
problems for workers in the united
states through the export of their jobs
to such places as mexico well
where covered action is concerned there
is going to be resistance
and so there is going to be a need to
intervene and to do what we were doing
during the cold war
against the left because wherever there
is resistance
to this economic system
there is going to be a need for the
united states to intervene to help its
friends
and to be putting down penetrating
dividing
and destroying those groups and
organizations
and people whom they see as threatening
i want to give a couple of examples
right now on
covered actions already to take
undertaken in the 1990s
starting with haiti in 1986 the cia set
up
sin that stands for
national intelligence service that was a
haitian service which was set up by the
cia and funded by the cia trained by the
cia and run by the cia
supposedly as an anti-narcotics
organization in actual fact they got
involved in trading
narcotics as has happened plenty of
times in the past
these people were involved in the coup
against aristide
in 1991. you know he won 67 of the vote
he only served a few months when the
military coup occurred
there are as much reporting and
certainly much relief that the cia was
very much involved
in that coup because father aristide is
anathema
really or had been seen
as an athlete to u.s objectives in haiti
and the rest of the hemisphere
he was a priest whose beliefs were based
on liberation theology
and liberation theology which comes out
of the
medellin colombia 1968 bishops
conference
was based on what they called a
preferential option for the poor
throughout latin america and
aristide believed that it was time
for the poor to organize and to demand
justice that is one of the reasons of
course
probably the main reason why he was
elected with such a huge majority
in the 1990 elections
well one of the people who worked in sin
uh as a teacher
teaching on uh liberation theology
naturally calling it communist was this
uh emmanuel toto constand
in 1991 with support from the cia and
the defense intelligence agency
constant begins to form these uh
death squads that became known as frat
and got really going in
1992 93 94. they killed as many as five
or six thousand
people murdered them tortured them to
death well
he was on the cia payroll and this is a
type of
covered action it's an intervention to
try to
control the politics of a foreign
country
in addition according to all reports
and i don't doubt them in the least
having the experiences i have
the cia was paying salaries to the
leaders of that military dictatorship
in haiti
the next country i'll mention is
guatemala they have been very much in
the news lately also in terms of
scandals relating to the cia
it has come out of the congress
congressman tory
was one of the people responsible for
making this public
that the cia was intimately connected
with
the uh guatemalan military death squads
that
killed michael devine a united states
citizen
innkeeper in guatemala and the husband
of
jennifer harbury an american lawyer
who was a guerrilla and who was captured
and tortured to death
the cia covered this up from congress
and from the white house apparently and
now the new ci director deutsch
deutsch has fired two cia people
involved in this cover-up
and has disciplined eight others but
this is standard procedure
working with these services to know
that they are involved in these
activities and i knew it when i was in
the agency i
worked with police and military security
and intelligence services
in south america and uh in fact in one
occasion i even heard the
moans and groans of a person being
tortured coming through the walls into
the office of the chief of police and
army general
in uruguay
one more thing about guatemala is that
it also came out that in 1990
when george bush with a flurry canceled
military aid
to guatemala because of the human rights
violations in that country
at the same time he instructed the cia
to keep on passing millions of dollars
to the guatemalan military secretly five
to seven million dollars per year
and of course as we sit here today the
cia has its people
in the guatemalan general staff g2
section which is their
principal intelligence service and also
in the presidential general staff
where they have this so-called
artificial archive
and uh which forms one of the major
death squads
in guatemala and the killing goes on it
all goes back to 1954 when the cia
overthrew a
democratically elected civilian
government
on behalf of united fruit company and
installed a military dictatorship and
it has been the same ever since 1954.
finally i'd like to mention bulgaria
quite some different distance from latin
america but
bulgaria had elections in 1990
and the former communist party of
bulgaria had renamed itself as had
so many others they now call themselves
in 1990 the bulgarian socialist party of
bsp
in english they won the elections
free and fairly according to western
observers who were there
they won something like 40 47 of the
vote over
uh the opposition coalition which won 36
percent
and they took 211 211
of the 400 seats in the parliament
the united states would not accept this
and so
through the national endowment for
democracy
i'm sorry i don't have enough time to go
into the background but this is a
u.s government-funded foundation
modeled on the german political
foundations it serves as simply a
conduit for money going to the afl-cio
international program the democratic
party national international program the
republican party's international program
and the u.s chamber of commerce's
international program uh they are
spending
tens of millions of dollars and so they
begin funding
students they begin funding a an
anti-government
trade union organization and
from the time of the elections on and
the victory by the uh
bulgarian socialist party which had
converted itself by the way into an
electoral party
along the lines of social democracy of
western social democracy
they uh decided these opposition
groups decided to make bulgaria
ungovernable
and they did it with help from the
united states not only from the national
endowment for democracy but also from
uh the free congress foundation one of
paul weirich's
um many groups operating out of
washington
who is the person running this program
for him against bulgaria but
laszlo pastor lazo pastor is a man with
a
long history of fascism he was a
convicted war criminal
in hungary served two years then he came
to the united states he was a
leading figure in the arrow crossed with
uh during the fascist period
which was uh the most fanatic of all the
nazi organizations in hungary when they
had the
nazi dictatorship coinciding with the
hitler period
in germany this man came to the united
states and attached himself to the
republican party and he's been
since the 50s one of the principal
people in the
ethnic ethnic and nationality
organizations
of the republican party he is now in
charge of this
program in bulgaria or in 1990 the
program in bulgaria
uh also assisted by national endowment
for democracy
the demonstrations go on and on and
eventually
they are successful and the government
by november
is forced to resign because of a general
strike
the united states was not as has been
the case
so many times before i could recite a
litany all night of similar cases
they were not satisfied with the
decision of the bulgarian people
in a democratic way electing the party
that they did not want
just as they did not want aristide and
in party in haiti
or they did not want the labor party in
brazil in the early 1960s in
power all of these examples of people
being elected parties being elected
governments being elected
and the united states not accepting
democracy but
overthrowing them and that's what they
did in bulgaria in 1990
the reason was not only that these
people were former communists
but that they were going to go slow
in terms of the reorganization of the
economy they were not going to apply the
shock therapy which had been applied
with such disastrous results
in poland and in the former soviet union
they did the same thing in albania in
1991 the
uh former communist reorganizer
reorganized as a new party won an
overwhelming uh victory in the 1991
elections in albania
what happened in bulgaria then happened
in albania
and the government was forced to resign
well the cia at the moment according to
most reports
has a covered action budget of about 500
million
dollars but it's not really clear
because all of these figures are
supposed to be secret but uh
the best guesses that i've read are
calculated to be between
hundred million and one billion dollars
for
secret intervention in the affairs of
other countries
and i believe that this is going to
certainly go on
in the future because
you can see what is happening in mexico
there is opposition to this
neoliberal economic project it is not
just in the zapatista movement
but remember that they went into action
on
january 1st of last year the day in
which nafta
went into effect and they knew
what was going to happen with this
so-called free-market
policy and so they opposed it but it's
not just the zapatistas that are
opposing it but
around the zapatista movement uh there
is a
huge support movement that developed
in mexico as well as the opposite main
opposition
party led by quote cardenas and so
there is going to be resistance in all
of these countries and i don't have the
slightest doubt that the cia
is working overtime in mexico trying to
help the mexican government
put down the satista movement in chiapas
and everywhere else the opposition is
cropping up
in mexico they're doing it because they
have always supported the pre
and they want stability before anything
else
in mexico and i have a feeling that they
are now preparing
uh perhaps uh for a
transition of power to the pan in mexico
and they want to make it as
stable and problem-less as possible
finally the question arises we know what
the
solutions of the right of the extreme
right
are to the problems that we face today
this structural
unemployment we know what the gingers
plan is the contract with america to
try to reduce the social safety net to
the bare minimum
to well you know all the plans that he's
putting forward
i don't have to uh even mention them but
to the even to the right
of uh gingrich there are many others who
have even more extreme
solutions to the problems and i
mentioned some of these groups
already the question is what is the left
doing is the left leaving
the scene for dominance by the right and
the
extreme right in the united states is
left slumbering through this out of
shock
from for example the elections of last
november
i think not the very fact that all of
you are here tonight
shows that there is uh certainly
interest
in a uh a more humane i think
solution to all these problems and the
fact that fidel castro was given such a
marvelous
uh welcome in new york city i don't know
about the time magazine in the united
states but the time that came to me over
in europe has fidel on the cover again
uh featuring the fantastic reception
that he got by so many
people from so many people in new york
city when he was
visiting the u.n uh just recently
so there's no question that uh that
people are out there who are looking for
um progressive solutions to all of these
problems
it is true i think that the cia and uh
none of these committees that are right
now examining the role the future role
of the
intelligence community and here i i i've
forgotten if i mentioned but uh
there is a joint white house senate
committee looking into the future role
that that was led by let's les aspen
until he died
there is one in the house of
representatives and on the outside of
the government
there are such groups as the 20th
century fund who are also looking into
these
uh questions of the future of the united
united states intelligence community not
once have i seen so far
that they are interested very much in
the extreme
right that has grown so dramatically in
recent years and has such
extreme solutions of their own to
the problems
but i think certainly there
is and there are progressive solutions
to all of these problems that we have
got to find
but one thing is certainly clear we
cannot do it on our
own as individuals there is no
strength in an individual in these
situations
one has to belong to an organization
and this is just as true in political
organizing and political pressuring and
lobbying
as it is in a trade union movement an
individual worker has no
power at all before the
management but they do have power when
they unite and the same goes for all the
rest of us
who want to see progressive solutions to
the problems that affect us every day
and so i would simply leave you with the
exhortation
to if you're not involved yet and you
want to see
solutions humane solutions to the
problems
then one has to get involved with a
group
there is a green movement of course
around
there are student organizations there
are new parties
which people are trying to form and of
course there is always the
solidarity movement and if i were
back in the states i think my first
choice would be to work
in solidarity with cuba in fact i'm
doing it all the time over in europe
the importance of the cuban revolutions
survival cannot be over
emphasized because they have shown that
they can take care of their whole
population in terms of
health care education and even
uh make significant strides toward
decent housing for everyone even though
they are
essentially a an under vet or a
an underdeveloped country or a
developing country however you look at
it
but they have an average income of
something like per capita income
something like
2 500 a year it's probably even less now
that figures from the cia's uh yearbook
of 1993-94
and uh happily they have turned the
corner in cuba
i was there in june and i just spoke
with someone else today who had been
there uh later than i had
and we were both in agreement that
things are looking a lot better than
they did
just last year but it's very important
for all of us because they have shown
that with an inclusionist
inclusionist system
which does not marginalize huge
proportions of the population
they can provide for everyone
and if they can do it certainly we can
do that in this country the problem of
course is that we have an exclusionist
system
and it is a system which is
marginalizing larger proportions of the
population
all the time millions and millions of
people who are becoming redundant
they're not needed
anymore they are simply surplus
so i would simply leave you uh with that
as an idea
that uh i don't know what you have in
terms of solidarity with cuba here but
remember that uh
there is a national organization called
pastors for peace and these are
this is a church-based uh organization
uh based in phil
in minneapolis and they organize
caravans peace caravans for cuba
and they've done some from mexico also
uh they used to start in canada and come
down
from all different areas they could have
maybe 10 or 15 or even more
different caravans of trucks which go
and they stay in churches and they
collect all sorts of things for cuba
school supplies medicines and so forth
food and then they would cross the
border at uh
in texas and the stuff would be shipped
from tampico
but now it's different they are starting
in the south of the united states
and they are moving toward canada where
the stuff is shipped from from i believe
from
montreal uh here in orange county
you can have a relationship with pastors
for peace
and you can be sure that in a future
caravan
that that caravan can come through this
county and uh
receive the support of people like you
in terms of getting food and medicine
and school supplies and so forth
that's one suggestion that i might make
well i've gone way over my time i see
here
i simply would thank you all very much
for coming again and for your attention
and why don't we uh why don't we raise
it to questions and
some kind of discussion now
thank you very much for that
questions this is the microphone where
you can come and ask questions
i heard a lecture a while back by
michael perrini he had a little
ingenious method of determining who goes
first who goes second and whatever
he said why don't we just have it we'll
start off with a woman then we'll go a
man then we'll go a woman then we'll
call a man or whatever
and that way what everyone will have
equal opportunity so we can do that
everyone's not scared to ask questions
please come up the other thing is couple
of announcements that i forgot to make
is this is our mailing list outside we
have plenty of shows that are coming up
next semester if you're not on this
please
put your address on there we will be
having howard zinn coming in april
it will be his only southern california
appearance in 1996. don't miss him he's
excellent he's the author of people's
history of the united states and there
are other people
to come and with that go ahead and ask
your questions by the way i tried to
keep away from
personal matters tonight but if anybody
wants to know about my 4 million
lawsuit against barbara bush just ask me
or my 6 million
lawsuit against the government for a
murder plot in the early 1970s
i'll be glad to tell you all about them
hi i'm from the sierra club in orange
county
i'm the orange county political events
and cultural events representative
and we are very much concerned what
happens
with rotten government rotten government
equals rotten politics or vice versa
and then you get a rotten environment
they're all
inextricably involved
you really can't separate any of them
and we're working for environmental
justice
and really working hard you can join us
for
since a day we have student rates this
is not a
commercial um but we
really want people to get active in
orange county
and this is just one of the avenues that
is offered to you
now to a question in germany
i understand fascism never died and
is definitely on the rise how safe is it
for my friends
who are from the country of eritrea
which is just
north of ethiopia how safe is it for
them to remain
living in germany
they're taking their chances uh it is a
roll of the dice more or less
and um uh you never can tell when these
people are going to
attack and uh they will attack simply
because a person's skin is
black or because uh they look different
or they look like a turk uh they're out
looking for people to attack the
skinheads are and the skinheads are very
closely uh
allied are very much a part of the
neo-nazi movement in germany
as i mentioned there are more skinheads
in germany than in any other country uh
uh the adl calculates that there are
some 5000 or so
in germany so i think any person i have
a very good friend there a
former student of mine at the university
of hamburg who's coming around
from time to time her name is sheila
jackson she comes from chicago
and she talks about the problems that
she has and
and they are really very serious and
she's nervous
but she's staying there for a time being
and before coming back to the united
states but it
is a a calculated risk for any person of
color to
live in germany right now and certainly
the same applies to uh
to jews it applies also to anti-fascists
there is an anti-anti-far movement among
the near
within the neo-nazi movement in germany
and that is they are going out and
searching for and attacking people who
are working against them
they've even published hit lists with
names and addresses
and uh so they're in fact in germany
less attacks going on now than there
were two years ago
but that's mainly because the coal
government has adopted much of the
extreme right program
to take the wins out of their sales
it's a danger yes
uh yes i'd like to address a question to
you about the
i i hesitate to call it the national
security
state because that sounds like it's too
unified
um there's a woman poet she made the
observation that uh
you have a secret ballot and they have a
secret government
and never shall the two meet um i
i think from i think she hit the nail on
the head
and it seems to me that the only real
checks and balances aren't the ones we
were taught about in government class
but rather the infighting
within and between these intelligence
organizations that comprise the national
security state and my question to you
would revolve around the events in
oklahoma
given the historical background of how
the fbi for example operated in san
diego with the secret army
organization they always tend to
penetrate at or
near the top of those organizations the
sao they
they ran the number two man they
provided 80
percent of the financing it was a
right-wing paramilitary group
the offshoot of the minuteman
organization
my question to you is these militia
units would it not be
since they're not a homogeneous group
but rather heterogeneous
would it not be likely that there is a
good deal of penetration
at or near the top of those militia
groups by
various elements within the national
security state
i think it's likely to uh assume that
yes
i think it's a valid i mean to assume
that they are penetrated
at what level i couldn't tell you of
course they certainly didn't stop the
oklahoma city
uh bombing and that is one of the
reasons for penetrating is to
to anticipate these types of uh
operations they were not able to
penetrate uh world trade center bombing
either but that was
not militia that as we know was foreign
uh
of foreigners at least and for different
motives but uh
yes i think that uh certainly uh they
are
taking them into account since oklahoma
city
whether they put much emphasis in the
private militias before open city i
don't know it
seems i have the impression that they
did not
but uh they certainly better uh right
now because those people are going to
carry out more bombings
uh they they they view the government in
washington as the enemy
and as you read uh more about them
you see how they are using high tech
they are uh
they have the uh info telephones they
have the uh
faxes they have the internet and they
are in contact with each other
even though with this uh doctrine of
leaderless
resistance wherein very small cells
will be formed within a larger group and
no one else is to know about this very
small cell and among the cells from the
different groups
uh they will not know each other that is
a um
that is a i think i mentioned already a
a doctrine which was uh promulgated by
this uh neo-nazi lewis beam
to prevent penetration of these small
action
cells they are organized along the order
of
of the order of the 1980s which came out
uh william pierce's book you know the
turner diaries
uh and those were that was a group of up
to 40 people who were involved in
bank robberies and armored car holdups
and
murder during the 1980s 83 84.
but i think that's the best answer i can
give you to the question i think yes
certainly the government uh if it's not
it certainly should be
thank you very much for your answer
you're welcome
thank you
my name is richard rose and i'm a
declared candidate
for congress against bob dornan in the
46th congressional district
and i'm representing the peace and
freedom party of california
the only socialist party in the state
i have two questions one why is it that
it seems that the only responses to the
rise in fascism in this
country uh is by the
si by the quiet twin brother of the
republican party
to give us more laws that seem to erode
our constitutional rights
as american citizens i
i refer to the the new plan by the fbi
to tap
more telephone lines and to place more
surveillance on
individuals i know i read that uh
that uh plan about fbi the day i was
leaving hamburg i could not believe it
they want to be able to uh tap
what is it one percent one percent of
all the
telephone calls in the major
metropolitan areas
and that turns into the tens of
thousands of calls uh
i can understand uh i can understand why
they want that type of information
because
or that type of uh permission because
they can get
a lot of information that way but uh the
trouble is uh
the targeting who is going to be uh
targeted they talk about
uh narcotics for example as justifying
um
these uh telephone taps but uh it really
is a frightening thing when you uh when
you stop to think about it uh that
privacy will be so uh infringed
i got used to it a long time ago i i
used to do some things on my telephone
and
i could predict what was going to happen
next and it usually happened
because i knew there what they were
doing um
but uh i don't really get your question
i don't know why is it that the
democratic party and the people
therein and members thereof have
uh not raised their voices against the
the laws and the new rules that are
being passed that will simply
assist the rise in fascism in this
country
and they're doing it in the name of
going after these militias
and at the same time they're ending up
they're going to be eroding our civil
rights
well i think the answer to the question
is uh why doesn't that you would agree
that uh the democrats are not going to
oppose
these measures the main reason being
that there is so little
difference between the democrats and the
republicans i mean i've always thought
for many years that uh we really had a
one-party system in this country with uh
two wings of the same parties
giving themselves different names and i
think it's uh that
i think it it's it's the same situation
today
uh what we need really is the resurgence
of
uh additional parties we need perhaps uh
proportional
and sort in the united states there are
all sorts of solutions
to these problems but what we have to do
is recognize the threat from the extreme
right in
in this country and elsewhere and
understand that this is a very flawed
system we live under
but it is not the worst one under which
we could live
there are much worse ones out there and
so it's important to
keep in mind that we want to preserve
this liberal tradition
from the enlightenment and the french
revolution which has brought us
some good things and some bad things but
socialism comes from the very same
tradition
and so does humanism and these concepts
are rejected by the
and they're held in contempt by the
extreme right uh no matter where you
find these people
and it is something for us to defend and
to carry on
with developing a better society all the
time
more justice more equality of
opportunity and so forth
little we have my second question is
this
we've current we've recently heard that
there was a micro virus created by the
united states government and sold to
iraq and that this micro virus may have
been used by iraq
in the war of the gulf war
when a person called we were we have
been told that when a person called bob
dornan's office
to inquire about this information of
what's now being known as gulf war
syndrome or by the va as gold bricking
we the person was hung up on and
immediately
uh was re-contacted by the national
security agency
is there any reason to believe that this
information
is true i couldn't tell you i didn't
hear that
i didn't i'm i'm unfamiliar with the
story of the um
uh virus i'm not unfamiliar with the
gulf
uh war syndrome and how it's afflicted
uh so many people
but we will recall the agent orange
episode 2 from the vietnam war
they didn't want to recognize the
damages caused
to gis from the use of agent orange
and they still are refusing to recognize
that this gulf war syndrome
is really uh a a a widespread thing
coming out of the gulf war they
recognize individual cases of problems
but i don't think they recognize so far
that there is an institutional question
involved i don't know about the virus
though thank you very much you're
welcome
i wanted to ask a little further about
this question of the relationship
between uh
the security and intelligence community
and the uh
the racist and right-wing forces there
have been a number of
exposures recently uh in canada where
the
royal canadian mounted police apparently
and the wackenhut corporation had
had people at very high levels not
really
penetrating but actually building up the
neo-nazi apparatus in
canada and on the other hand that the
white supremacists in canada had
extensively infiltrated the canadian
army special forces and in the somali uh
uh
incursion uh several of them had been
involved in uh
literally racial attacks against somali
people killing a number of somali
civilians
to earn their points to be white
supremacist warriors
and in germany some similar recent
disclosures i think there spiegel
has put out that one of the main leaders
of the neo-nazi movement in germany is
currently on trial with many of
alfins is apparently an operative for
german intelligence
and on the other hand in this country
we've seen that larry pratt who's one of
the leaders of the
militia movement you mentioned the
situation in guatemala
and in fact he is somebody who had been
part of the reagan foreign policy
apparatus
involved with the council into america
into american security and wrote a book
which was the model for the militias in
this country about the experience in
guatemala of the civilian armed patrols
which were used as a counter insurgency
force to augment
uh state power in guatemala to do what
the army uh
and and the cia back forces couldn't do
themselves by
they evangelized guatemalans and armed
them to
carry out warfare against the
similar experience he talks about in his
book uh in the philippines where
john singlet was involved in arming sort
of the right wing of the aquino movement
also a kind of
christian populist force that was given
weapons and used to
as a counter-insurgency tool in the
philippines and then he takes that model
and applies it to the united states and
says
we have to form these christian militias
so i i i think that
there's really at the beginning
these security forces and intelligence
agencies need to
pay more attention to those groups but i
think there's there's a more malicious
uh reciprocity that goes on between at
least some elements of
of these national security and and
counter insurgency
operations and the racist right and and
fascist forces you're talking about
so i was wondering if you could comment
on what you perceive for example in
germany now or in the united states
to your knowledge about the role that
these
security agencies might be playing and
actually building up
in europe i haven't seen any indication
that
i don't think i've seen any indication
that suggests
uh government involvement in involvement
in the building up of these forces
because the governments over there are
competitors with these political forces
in the electoral sphere
and certainly where the violence is
concerned
the governments stand nothing to gain
through this violence
that is carried out against the usual
targets
so i don't think i've seen anything in
europe in
america i with the exception of of the
canadian situation
i don't recall any indication that
there have been on the federal level at
least
indicators of support for the
development of the private
i've had support in the past paseo
comitatus also
has been on the local groups and police
departments or at least individual
police officers there they have found
quite a from the past
and you know very good books uh for
anyone interested
uh terrific books coming out right now
on the extreme right in the united
states
and uh in europe and there are such
things as reports from the european
parliament uh on their investigations of
the
80s and 90s into the rise of neo-fascism
neo-nazism xenophobia and racism
so there's an enormous amount of reading
material out there for those people who
are interested in
and you can find it without the least
trouble
yes uh yeah i had a lot of questions but
i'll ask you to uh what whatever did
become of that
united fruit company in guatemala and
also
how is the cia
involved with the united nations foreign
policy and
you mentioned mexico in the south as far
as the
what i would call suppressing the unions
and keeping the wages low in mexico and
you mentioned a little bit about
resources
and then at the same time they i don't i
don't think they could be so stupid
to know that that would cause massive
immigration over here
which i still believe the united states
lies in
in its historical books about the
conquest
of the southern states of mexico so
i'd like to for you yeah that first
question about guatemala i didn't quite
get that um
whatever it became of the united fruit
company that you mentioned
well uh at one point the president of
united fruit or ceo of
united fruit uh jumped out of the uh the
building in boston
killed himself i think his name was
black and uh then it may be that the
company split
or they changed its name but uh
i'm not really sure if chiquita brands
is what was formerly united fruit
maybe someone here knows you you're
nodding that it is
yeah and uh united brands is the new
name they took on
and uh i think they've even changed that
one now
but uh uh united fruit and or united
brands those banana companies they
jump around from country to country
because the soil is only good for about
20 years
for growing bananas and in guatemala it
was a real scandal the way the cia
intervened because the guatemalan
10-year revolution of october
was the best thing that had ever
happened in latin america
since the conquest they
put top priority on education during the
first
few years and then when our benz came in
in 1952 they enacted an agrarian reform
which affected the lands of the united
fruit company and it so happened that
on the board of united fruit not on the
board sorry
uh senior partners in the law firm that
served united fruit sullivan and
cromwell in new york were the two alan
the two dullers brothers allen and
foster dollars
john foster dollars was then secretary
of state for eisenhower
and alan dulles was the director of the
cia
eisenhower approved a plan to overthrow
the government and to turn the clock
back
in guatemala and that happened and it
has been one horror story
ever since 1954 when that occurred
and we can see that the cia is still in
there like they always were
and it before it was to counter
communism or to defeat communism the
guerrilla movement
and the government are in talks right
now as some of you will know
and the chances are that they may be
able to
keep this peace process going and stop
the war but only recently the government
visited a massacre on a bunch of
peasants who were coming back
a group of peasants who had come back
from from years of exile in mexico city
so guatemala has a very long way to go
before it's a
can be called a respectable place to
to live or to support 1988
mexican presidential elections mr
cardenas the
center left party candidate by all
accounts except the pre he won that
election yes of course he was never
seated
one presidential term later in the 1994
mexican presidential elections
he came in a distant third behind the
pre
and the center-right party the pan
first i was wondering if you believe
those election results if you believe
that
the center-left party really did almost
sink into oblivion in that
one presidential term secondly i was
wondering
if you could tell us the processes that
the cia uses to manufacture
election results and if when you were in
the cia did you ever
fabricate an election or participate in
displacing a legitimate government
within a legitimate government
well first i as far as mexico is
concerned i'm a little bit removed from
uh
from that scene i know the prd has had
very large internal problems and i think
those internal problems
were reflected in those 1994 elections
uh
certainly he did not do as well as
before what the cia might have been
doing in there to
foment discord within the prd or to
make certain that he did not win the
elections in 1994
is anybody's guess i am not close enough
to the scene to
to come up with speculations on what
exactly they might have been doing
i was not involved in rigging elections
we did give money to our selected
candidates
who usually won and
these candidates would run from a
conservative party for example in
ecuador
uh where they at the party meetings they
had a crucifix on the table
uh very closely allied with the catholic
church down there
to the social christian movement kind of
like christian democratic movement
to right-wing social democrats our
enemies list started with left-wing
social democrats to socialist communists
and so forth all the way to the armed
left
and uh in elections we were always
involved yes
um i was involved somewhat in the 1964
chilean elections
because we were spending huge amounts of
money in the chilean elections to
prevent allende from being elected
having almost been elected uh in the
previous
presidential elections in 1958 1964 we
poured in millions of dollars to the
fray campaign
that was christian democrat and in i was
over in uruguay
channeling money
chilean escudos they were called at that
time over
for use by our station in the embassy in
santiago for
the election operation the cia election
operations are
the oldest in fact of the cia the very
first big operation that came into um
being with the founding of the cia in
was the italian elections coming up in
april 1948 and the first item on the
agenda for the first meeting of the
national security council which was
established by the same law as the cia
the national security act of 1947 at the
very first meeting
of the national security council under
truman
they took up the question of the italian
elections and truman set aside 10
million dollars
a lot of money at that time for the cia
to intervene secretly and try to buy
those elections for the christian
democrats
and it was successful they were afraid
that the coalition of
socialists and communists who had been
the backbone of the resistance to
fascism toward the end of the war
uh and came out with lots of prestige
might win those elections and uh so they
continued over the years for the next 20
or 25 years they continued to give
millions and millions of dollars um
perhaps as much as 100 million dollars
to the christian democrats oh
that whole system came tumbling down uh
beginning two years ago
or three years ago now i guess with this
tangent topoly
scandal the kickback scandal and um
aldo i mean not el namoro but um
yes giulio andriate is now on trial
uh for having been the mafia's chief
protector and he was the cia contact man
all through the years
uh no end to this kind of scandal i i
could go on all night
but i think we have to get out of here
i'm going to be
uh back there i think right uh alex
oh i see it's over there all right i'll
be over here signing books and if you
those other two who are in line just
come over here and i'll speak to you
by the book table